# IBM-Project-42147-1660652244
Emerging Methods for Early Detection of Forest Fires

Forest fires result in a wide range of negative effects, including the destruction of wildlife habitat, the extinction of plants and animals, the destruction of nutrient-rich top soil, the reduction of forest cover, the loss of valuable timber resources, the ozone layer being destroyed, the loss of livelihood for tribal and poor people, the acceleration of global warming, the increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration, the degradation of catchment areas, the loss of biodiversity, the spread of disease, etc. Thus, Develop a system to detect forest fires at the earliest stage possible using the latest technologies. 

The ecological balance is maintained by the forests. It acts as an environment that enriches the diversity of various organisms. The motive of the project is to detect the forest fire as early as possible so that we can preserve the life of various species prevailing in it from the fire. Utilizing the currently available techniques of smoke sensors put in the buildings, fire detection can be incredibly challenging. Due to their outdated technology and design, they are costly and slow. The use of artificial intelligence for identification and issuing alerts with video from CCTV footage is critically examined in this study. For this project, a self-built dataset of videoframes with fire is used. The data is then preprocessed and a machine-learning model is built using CNN. The dataset's test set is used as input to verify the method, and experiments are recorded. The goal of the project is to create a machine that is both affordable and very precise and can be applied to practically any fire-detecting situation.  
